Hey, everybody.
So I'm Chris LeCroy.
I manage the engineering group that
does the QuickTime streaming server and
the Darwin streaming server at Apple.
And some of the things we're
going to talk about today are
we're going to go through,
I'm going to have some of the
engineers come out and show you
some of the different ways that
you can modify and extend the
server using the server module API.
It's an API that we've built
into the server that allows you
to build modules that actually
add functionality to the server.
We've added a new protocol in
streaming server 3 that allows you to,
using straight HTTP requests,
make requests to get and set
values out of the server.
I'll have an engineer talk about that.
And we've added a new web-based admin,
which is also extensible,
and we'll talk about that
with a third engineer.
So let me briefly tell you what's going
on with QuickTime streaming server.
We just released this week
QuickTime streaming server 3.0.
It's available now.
You can download it for the web.
It's easy to install on Mac OS X.
It's also included as a standard
service in Mac OS X server,
which was also just released this week.
and all of the Darwin versions
of the server are available
for download as well,
3.0 versions of those servers.
And there's also a tarball of the
source code that's downloadable,
as well as the CVS repository
being fully up-to-date.
Okay,
so Steve Ussery is going to come out
and talk to you a little bit about how
to write modules using the module APIs.
Steve?
Good morning, everyone.
Is this on?
Yes, it is.
As Chris said,
my part of the talk is going to be
on how you extend QuickTime Streaming
Server with the module APIs.
And more specifically,
I'm going to talk about
the following areas.
First thing I'm going to talk
about is the module architecture,
kind of a real high-level overview
of what the module architecture is.
I'm going to talk very briefly about
what's new in the API for QTS 3.0.
And I'm going to walk you through a
very simple source code example of what
a module extension would look like.
And then I'm going to give you a
really brief demo of that module.
So I should warn you before I move on
that there's a lot of material here,
and I'm going to cover it very,
very quickly.
If you would like more detail,
the place to look is to download our
source code and look at the top level.
You'll find a documentation folder,
and inside that documentation folder,
you'll find a streaming server
modules documentation file.
It's a PDF file,
between 300 and 400 pages, I believe.
So there's a lot of detailed information
in that if you're interested in this.
So, let me talk a little bit
about the module architecture.
For those of you who are familiar
with the Apache web server,
our module architecture is very
loosely modeled on that architecture.
The concepts are the same,
but the details are different.
In other words, the implementation is
completely different,
but the overall concepts are the same.
There are two types of modules,
static and dynamic.
A static module is compiled in with the
streaming server source code itself.
So when you build the server,
you have to compile in a static module.
A dynamic module, on the other hand,
is an external code fragment or
shared library that's placed in a
streaming server modules folder that is
identified as one of the preferences in
the streaming server preferences file.
So once the server starts,
it will detect modules in that
modules folder and load them.
And from that point on,
they behave exactly the same
as a static module would.
So the API is implemented as
what we call module roles.
And what module roles are,
they're callbacks when the server is in
a well-defined state and you're passed
an environment through a parameter
block that's defined for every role.
And each role has a specific
parameter block format.
To show you how powerful this
feature of the server is,
all of the features of
QuickTime Streaming Server,
all of the ones that are of interest,
I should say, are implemented as modules
within the server itself.
So I'm going to bring up a
diagram that's meant to be
illustrative of kind of the overall
architecture of the module itself,
of the module's architecture itself.
At the topmost box,
you'll see what's called the
QuickTime Streaming Server module itself,
and that's the main module that
handles all roles in the absence of
any other module to handle that role.
And most of those handling roles in
that module are do-nothing roles.
In other words,
they just return no error and do nothing.
Immediately below that,
in the six boxes below that,
are not actually modules,
but those are collections of
cross-platform C++ code that you
can call and use within your module.
There's all sorts of things in
there that are platform-independent
ways of doing networking,
of threading, of mutexing,
all sorts of things that you would need.
In fact, on the upper right side of that,
you'll see something called... Qt file.
That's of interest because that's
the code that knows how to parse
the QuickTime file itself and take
it apart and see what's in it.
In all the green area down below,
those are typical static modules
that are compiled in with
the streaming server itself.
And I'm not going to
describe all of them,
but I'll pick out a few just kind of
at random here and talk about them.
QTSS access.
What that module does is it handles
all the authentication for the server.
Let's pick another one.
The QTSS Reflector module is interesting.
It's one of the more complex
modules in the server.
What it does is it takes a broadcast
stream from an external broadcaster
of some sort and replicates that
stream out to multiple clients.
We pick one more, QTSS Admin Module.
What that one does is it handles
our web-based admin protocol,
which you will hear John in the following
discussion after me describe in detail.
I should also mention that many of
the C++ classes up above are based on
something we call QTSS objects and are
actually registered in a dictionary
structure within the server itself,
so you can actually access
them through the web admin and
change and set parameters within
those classes dynamically.
Down at the very bottom of the diagram,
you'll see two blocks in lavender.
Those are meant to be illustrative
of modules that somebody else wrote,
perhaps you.
That are loaded at the time the
server starts up to provide some
kind of new functionality that's
not available in the core server.
So let's move on and
talk about module roles.
Okay, so the very first role you'll see
on the list is the register role.
That's the one that your module
will be called in no matter what.
That's the one role that's
always called within a module.
And its only purpose is to say what
other roles your module supports.
So that callback is called immediately
after the server starts and your
module is loaded in memory and
your module is responsible for
saying what other roles it supports.
The next one on the list,
initialize and shutdown role.
Those are useful if you need to
allocate global data or allocate
memory or set up global data.
If you do set up global data,
you'll probably want to remember that
the server is multi-threaded and...
Your global data can be called
in multi-threaded contexts,
so if it's critical past stuff,
be sure the mutex protect it.
The next roll-down is one that's
only of interest if your module
needs to read preferences.
So that's your callback to say, okay,
it's time to reread the preferences file,
which is XML-based,
and grab the preferences out of
there and set some data within my
module based on those preferences.
The error log roll is mostly
not of interest to most people,
but it will be of interest to
us today because that's a very
simple one I've chosen to use in
the demo because it's really easy.
The only thing the error log roll does
is any time the server generates an error
log message to be written to the log,
if your module is
registered for this roll,
it's also called back with a
pointer to the error message.
So you might use this, say,
for localizing error messages, perhaps.
RTP roles.
RTP is the standards-based protocol
that's used to carry a stream
pipeline from the server to a client.
It's a connectionless protocol,
meaning it's like a datagram
or packet-level protocol.
And it's the primary transport
for sending a stream from
the server to the client.
So that's a very powerful way to
actually get into and look at the
stream or do something with it.
So if you maybe wanted to do
something like server-side
encryption of the stream itself,
you could use that role.
So let's continue on with the roles that
I think you'll find the most interesting.
And that's the RTSP roles.
RTSP, unlike RTP,
is a connection-oriented
protocol built on top of TCP.
And it is very powerful in that it
manages all of the communication
between the client and the server,
and it's responsible for managing
all the streams within that context.
So, most of the opportunities for
doing interesting things to the
server lie within the RTSP roles.
So, I'm going to take the
very first one there,
the RTSP filter role.
Whenever the client starts
a session with the server,
it sends an RTSP request in what
we call an RTSP describe function.
And that's very similar,
if you're familiar with HTTP,
that's very similar to an HTTP GET.
So, within that,
you can do a lot of things.
that describe is all sorts of
parameters to describe the session
that the client wants to see.
So what the filter role can do is grab
any of those parameters and change
them or modify them or augment them.
So it's a powerful way you
can use to augment what the
client's asking the server to do.
The next one, the route role,
someone yesterday asked me how would I,
from a client,
I want to have my students type in a URL,
and once it gets to the server,
I want to look up that URL in a
database and substitute some other URL.
So you could use the
route role for doing that.
That's primarily the kind
of things it's suited for.
The authorized role allows you a
chance to get in and do authentication,
other than if you're not happy
with the way the streaming
server does authentication,
you want to write your own
authentication-level module,
that would be the role you would want
to register your module for and use.
RTSP pre-processor role is your last
chance to get into the stream and do
interesting things once the client
session is set up and all of the
variables and internal things have
been set up to begin the stream itself.
That's your last chance to do it.
That lends itself to interesting things,
like you could perhaps do a redirect
to another server at that point.
But if you do do something
like a redirection,
you have to notify the client by
replying to the request yourself.
And in that case,
you will not call the next
role the request role,
which I'll describe momentarily.
The post-processor role is primarily
interesting if you wanted to do
something like gather statistics,
like for logging.
The final role you probably won't call,
because only one module
can call this role,
the RTSP request role.
That's the one that actually
manages the real streaming session
between the client and the server.
And that's going to be done for you
automatically by the main QTSS module.
So you probably will
not want to use that.
But it's there if you do want to use it.
If you want to manage
the session yourself,
because you don't like
the way the server does,
does it,
feel free to write the code yourself.
Okay, here's some new API that's in
QuickTime Streaming Server 3.0.
So, one of the things we were asked to do
is provide callbacks for doing file I.O.
So,
any time your server reads a media file,
it now has the opportunity,
if it's registered for these roles,
to be called back at interesting times.
The very first one is the
open file pre-processed role.
That's used to say, yes,
I support this media type, or no,
I don't open this kind of file type.
Or, no, I don't have file permissions
to open this file type.
So, you can do those kinds of things.
It's a yes or no, I handle that file.
The open and close file
roles are interesting if you
want to do something like,
instead of opening a POSIX file,
you want to open a media
type from a database.
And when you are done on the other side,
close the database connection.
You can do it there.
The read and write roles are
read from the media file,
write from the media file.
And the request event file
role are only of interest.
If you want to do asynchronous I/O.
And you can use that for being called
back when your reads are write complete.
So, as I said, I was going to show you
a very simple module,
and the module I'm going to show you
augments the error logging routine,
and what it's going to do is,
in addition to writing to the error log,
it's going to email an
administrator the error message.
And so I'm going to walk you through
the code real quick to do that.
It's really short.
The very first thing your module would
do would be have a main function,
and every module must
have a main function.
That's the only entry point
that your module is called in.
Anything else goes through that function,
and the only thing it will in turn
do is call the dispatch function.
A dispatch function is just
a switch in case statement,
switching on the roles that you support.
And other than the register role,
the only one I'm showing here is
something called the error log role,
which I have written a routine
called handle error that is my
own routine within my module
that's going to do something
interesting with that error message.
And I'll show you that code in a moment.
And below that, you would see other roles
that I was registered for,
such as initialize or shutdown.
So, in order for those roles to be
called in that dispatch function,
you also have to have a register role.
And the register role,
as I said previously,
is called when your module loads.
It tells QuickTime Streaming
Server what roles your module supports.
As you see in this slide,
I support initialize and
shutdown the error log roles.
The only thing my initialize
and shutdown roles do is I've
written a very simple SMTP class,
which I won't show you.
It's kind of boring.
It initializes an SMTP class,
and then on the other side,
when the server shutdowns,
it closes down the SMTP class.
The code that I did write
is the handle error role,
and you saw that in the dispatch
slide on the previous slide.
So, in order for that dispatch
function to be called,
I have to register that,
that I support the error log role,
and this is where I do it.
So let's look at my really complicated
function for handling error messages.
There it is.
The my_send_mail function is,
just calls my little
simple SMTP class to send.
I grab from the parameter block pointer
that's pointing to me the string,
the error message string,
and I send it on its way.
So now that we've seen
all this wonderful code,
let's see how it works.
So one of the things you
would normally do on--
The first step to make this work would
be you would drag your module into the
modules folder and restart the machine.
I didn't want to do that, so I just...
This is my demo folder here.
Now here is the compiled module I built.
And I have this alias on the desktop
to my streaming server modules folder.
I'm going to drag it in.
OK, it's in place.
Now my server functionality is extended.
Next thing I want to do is
bring up the web-based admin,
which Mythili will show
you as the last talk.
So I won't go into it.
Let me click on that.
So I'm bringing up the web-based admin.
It tells me the server's not running.
So I'm gonna click on Start Server Now.
And if all goes well,
I'll see the page of statistics that
tells me the server's up and running.
There it is.
So I'm gonna stall a little bit because
I'm waiting for my mail to be routed
from my SMTP host to my POP server.
But I'm going to bring up this really
nifty mail program from Mac OS X,
which I really like.
I thought it was pretty cool.
And you'll see,
suddenly it magically appeared as
an error message from the server.
So in addition to writing this
error log message to the server,
to the error log, and I did something to
make this error occur,
I intentionally...
made this error occur by not
having a QuickTime groups file
in my server configuration area.
And so, now you've seen me extend the
capabilities of the core server without
actually touching the server code itself.
And that concludes my demo.
So I'm going to ask
Chris to come back up.
Thanks, Steve.
So I think the important thing to
get from that demo is that it's
really simple to write these modules.
That's obviously simpler than most.
But what was it, 15 lines of code?
Something like that,
minus the mail stuff.
We won't talk about that.
Anyway,
we're going to have John Murata come out
and talk to you about the admin protocol.
And the admin protocol is something
new that we added to 3.0 that
allows you to administer the server
remotely through a variety of means.
Here's John.
So one of the great new features of the
3.0 server is the ability to control
and access information in the server
from a remote or local application.
And we do this through something
called the admin protocol.
I'll be covering that and showing
some examples at the end of my talk.
This first diagram is just a simple
review of where the admin module,
which implements the protocol,
sits inside of the server.
It's, as Steve was mentioning,
a built-in static module.
It uses the QTSS API to access the
data in the server and turns around
and speaks to any of the applications
who are talking to it over HTTP.
The data that the module has access
to is the same as for all modules,
and that's information
concerning the server.
As in the server object,
there is a client session object
for every client that's connected.
There's the preferences for the server
and a lot of other objects that are
all defined inside of the QTSS API.
So the admin module can go ahead and get,
set, delete,
or add data attributes and the values for
those attributes inside of the server.
An application that's external to
the server can go ahead and have
access to that data on a par with
any of the compiled-in modules.
This diagram is an example of
the hierarchy that's new in 3.0.
Prior to this, as a module,
you just received a set of objects
each time your module was called.
What we've added is the ability for an
object to encapsulate another object.
What this means is you can walk starting
from the server object all the way down
to the individual streams of each of the
clients that are connected to the server.
So, as an example,
we have our server object down
at the bottom of the next square.
There's the client sessions,
and then underneath that, the streams.
This is an example of the protocol.
It's very straightforward.
When we say HTTP, that's what it is.
It's just a GET.
There's a URL,
which is made possible by the
hierarchy built into the server.
The URL specifies an object and its data.
For this example, I'm using a GET of the
server container object,
and I'm passing in a wildcard,
giving back all of the attributes
for the server container.
And so this is just a brief overview.
If you want an in-depth read
on the protocol and the various
options available to you,
download the source code.
There's a documentation directory.
You'll find admin protocol
readme inside there,
and take a quick look at that.
And now I'm going to show you some
examples of the protocol working.
OK, so I've just created a simple web
page here with some predefined URLs.
Their URLs are individual
queries to the server.
The first HTTP query is
to the server object,
and the command is get.
So I'm just going to--
Click on this,
and I received the response
from the server through the
admin protocol and admin module.
It starts out with the container.
It says that I've asked for the server
attribute inside of the admin container,
and I have a zero error status code.
So this next query is
the same as the first,
except I'm adding the attribute for
the server version that's contained
inside of the server object.
And once again, it's a get.
And you can see that I'm receiving
back the value for that attribute.
Once again, this attribute,
the name may look a little odd to you,
but if you've seen the QTSS API,
you'll recognize that as one of the
fields inside of the server object.
In this next URL,
there's an asterisk wildcard which says,
take all the attributes inside
this object and return them.
So we have a full list.
and David LeRoy, and David LeRoy,
So some of the other things
that you can find inside of
the server are the preferences.
This is the QTSS server
preference object.
This is also the same information
that you'll find in the XML preference
file inside of the server.
So each of these values
represents what's in that file.
One of the nice things is that
if you were to change this,
any of the values here,
or add new attributes
through the protocol,
it also updates the file
on the server itself.
If you have a module and you've
compiled it and added it to the server,
it'll show up here in this modules list.
And you can see here we have the file,
some of the example modules,
the error mail module
that Steve showed you,
file module which handles
the on-demand movies,
reflector module that handles
broadcasts through the server,
and some of the various
other modules built in.
So the way you would provide a UI,
perhaps, for your module is--
To have the protocol
access your preferences,
and in this case I've just said
give me all the preferences
for all of the modules,
all in one query.
The way this query was executed,
The first wildcard represents the
name of the different modules,
and the last wildcard, asterisk here,
represents all the
attributes at that object.
Okay, so for this next example,
I'm going to bring up QuickTime Player.
And we're going to add
a couple of movies.
Okay, so this particular query is going
to go and look at the client
sessions that are currently playing.
I've asked it to get
each of the sessions.
There's two of them playing right now.
You can see the URL,
the movie duration for the first movie,
and also for the second movie.
The interesting thing about
this particular query is that
I've asked for specific fields
inside of each of the sessions.
So I've narrowed it down from just a
basic wildcard search to these three
attributes inside of the sessions.
Now, one of the features that you'll find
inside our web admin is the ability to
turn it on and off access of a port.
And the way we do that is
we have a list of ports,
and I have two right now that
the server is listening on.
So what that means is I can...
Bring up one of these movies,
and if I ask for a port
that doesn't exist,
It will fail the connection.
But one of the nice things about
the protocol is it allows you to
Control the behavior of the server.
So in this case, I'm going to tell it to
add the port value 8080.
We got it back.
A status is zero.
You can see that it's been added.
Now we're playing.
So we just changed the
behavior of the server.
So this last query that I have
for you pretty much starts out at
the server level as we started.
But I'm adding all of the
parameters that are currently
defined inside the protocol.
So the R is recursive search.
Verbose means give me the full
path for each of the attributes.
T is the type.
Give me the type of every attribute.
A is for access privileges.
And the last one, D,
is any debug information
that you might have.
It's asking that the admin module
return that in the protocol.
So here's an example of all
of the information that you
can actually pull out of the
server from an HTTP application.
So it starts out here at the server.
Keeps on going through the modules.
And keeps on running.
and all of these are,
you can see that we have different,
the values, the data types,
Access privileges, this one's read/write.
And here we have a list of error
messages that the server will be
sending back at various times.
And finally, we have our error status,
which is zero,
and a verbose message of OK.
And that's our demo.
Thanks, John.
So pretty obvious that that
protocol is really powerful.
We're hoping to see people
write a lot of tools around it.
We obviously use it for
the web-based admin.
And Mythili's going to show you a little
bit about the web-based admin and ways
you can extend that-- Mythili Devineni.
We talked a little about the
QTSS API and the admin protocol.
So now I'll talk about how you can use
this knowledge and a little more to
be able to customize the web admin.
The web admin is one of the
new features in QTSS 3.0,
as you would have probably gathered
if you were in the earlier session.
I'll talk a little bit about
what it is and how it works.
Also, I'll give you an example of the
special tags that we use in the
admin and end it with a demo.
The web-based admin is a simple web
server written in Perl and has some
CGI scripts and server-side includes.
It is entirely written in Perl,
and the CGI's handle all
the HTTP response headers.
The other thing that's different
from a regular web server is that the
authentication is provided by QTSs,
so the web admin server just acts as
a pipe between the browser and QTSs,
and it does not do any
authentication of its own.
Of course, it does SSL encryption,
and that's part of the
web admin server itself.
It's based on the admin protocol,
and that's how it talks to QTSs,
using the admin protocol.
Now, why would you want to
customize the web admin?
That's probably the question
that you're asking yourself.
Now, if you want to be able to configure
or modify advanced server preferences
or add advanced monitoring
capabilities to the server,
then you'd want to extend the web admin.
Otherwise,
if you're a module developer and you've
always wanted to have an easy way to
configure and monitor your module,
then extending the web
admin is the way to go.
You'll find that you can have
a very easy to use interface.
How does a web-based admin work?
What happens when you
actually get an HTTP request?
It's very similar to a regular web
server because when a request comes in,
it looks for the file and
in this case it's a CGI,
so it executes a CGI.
The CGI looks for the template HTML file,
which is whose file name is
passed in as the argument to it.
Now, the template HTML file has
a bunch of special tags,
which are kind of like
server-side includes.
And they tell the admin server
what to do with the tags.
That is, whether to go fetch data from
QTSs and process them and
display them in the format that
you want them to be displayed.
So, while parsing the template,
when the CGI finds such tags,
it will send a request to the QTSs
server using the admin protocol.
Well, it'll actually talk to
the QTSs admin module,
because the admin module is the one
that implements the admin protocol.
It gets a response back,
and the response is usually in the
form that you've probably seen when
John demoed the admin protocol.
The admin protocol response is parsed and
the values extracted and processed based
on the information in the special tags.
Once the tags are parsed,
the tags are removed and the data,
the process data is put into the HTML,
and the last step is to
append the CGI headers and
Then send the HTML to the browser.
So it's very simple,
very similar to a web server.
The only difference is that
there's an interaction between
the admin server and QTSS.
Now I've mentioned these
special tags all the time,
so you're probably wondering what
these look like and what they are,
because this is what you need to
know if you have to use extend
or extend the web admin server.
So one example of the tags is echo data.
And echo data basically tells the server,
the admin server, to fetch some data,
which is actually the value
associated with the attribute,
the parameter, and process it,
strip out everything else,
and just get the value and replace
the tag with the fetched value.
So if a tag such as this is
found in the HTML template,
The admin server translates this
to an admin protocol request,
which is again a simple HTTP GET.
As you can see, all it did was append.
modules admin to the actual parameter
that was in the template HTML.
And once it gets the response back,
it parses the value and replaces the tag
in the template HTML with this value.
So it's very similar for the other tags.
There might be more process information,
like format it into a radio
button or things like that,
or take an array and
display it as a table.
So there's a lot of things that
you can do with these tags.
To illustrate the use
of these special tags,
I'll do a short demo.
You'll find that the admin server can
talk to QTSs and it handles all the
other details like authentication,
encryption,
things like that for you already.
It's only a matter of writing
simple HTML to extend the web admin.
Now, earlier you got a glimpse of
how cool the web-based admin is,
but I find that that
wasn't enough for me,
so I decided...
[Transcript missing]
As you can see,
the static HTML shows up as the
form elements are all formatted.
The only thing that's interesting
here for us is the special tags.
They look very strange,
but those are the ones that
actually do all the job for you.
The example that I gave you, echo data,
is up there.
Then there are other tags
called get value and format
float and things like that.
These are the ones that you'll
find very useful when you're
extending the web admin.
If you see, there's nothing other
than just these tags.
These tags are doing all the work where
they're talking to the admin protocol.
Authentication is taken care of.
You don't have to do anything yourself.
Okay, and I also wanted to add,
have a way to get to my page
from the current web admin.
So I modified the navigation page,
the current navigation page
to include a link to my page.
So I'm going to drag this in to the
admin HTML folder and my snapshot page.
And let me go to the web
admin and see if it shows up.
There you go.
There is a link to my
snapshot and there it is.
So here is my custom snapshot page.
It has only certain
data that I care about,
which gets refreshed every five seconds.
Let's see if we can connect a couple
of clients to it and see if it gets
refreshed and you have the right output.
So as you can see, the CPU load and the
current RDSP connections,
all the data is being
refreshed every five seconds.
And it's only data that I care about,
which I can very easily get to.
And all that is authenticated.
I don't have to write anything else,
no other scripts or any code
to get this information.
So it's very easy to
customize the web admin,
and all you need to know
is how to write some HTML,
which pretty much everybody knows.
So, well, hopefully everybody knows.
And it's very easy to
get started if you don't.
And, well,
the cool thing is that we've done
everything for you so that you don't
have to go and redo all the work.
Thanks, Mythili.
So obviously,
you guys can see how powerful
that is and how simple it is
once you understand the tags.
So let me talk about some
development opportunities.
If you're in the prior session,
you've already heard these.
But there are a lot of ways to
modify or enhance the server.
The first one is,
since we're an open source project,
obviously,
you can modify the source code directly.
That's great if you really need
to do-- you typically don't need
to do that unless you're going
to be doing some really bizarre
things or maybe fixing a bug.
Those types of changes fall under
Apple's Apple Public Source License,
which means that if you make
changes to the source code directly,
you need to provide those
changes back to Apple.
And the reason for that is so
that we can let those changes
out to the rest of the world.
As Steve showed, you can write a module.
Modules are relatively simple to write,
depending upon what you're doing.
But at the same time, you can also write
really complex modules,
too, that do some pretty amazing things.
You can extend the UI using simple HTML,
possibly a little Perl script
that does some additional parsing.
If you've got some complicated
UI elements you need to deal with.
Or you can write a monitoring tool
using the protocol that John showed,
which is basically just straight HTTP,
which HTTP that allows you to get
to every attribute in the server,
basically.
And you can also implement
our caching protocol.
And this is not something
we showed today.
But the caching protocol is basically
an extension that we've offered
up to the IETF to RTSP and RTP for
providing additional information to
caching streaming servers for giving
them additional metadata so that
they can make sure that the stream
from the caching proxy to the client
is actually as good as the stream
from a server directly to a client.
So we encourage you guys to
take advantage of all of these
when you can or where you can.
For more information
on all of this stuff,
probably the best place to go
is make sure you're subscribed
to our developer mailing list.
And you can go to lists.apple.com,
just search for the word stream
and you'll find the developer's
list and the user's list as well.
And these lists are actually really good.
The content tends to be very focused.
The traffic is actually not
so high that it's annoying,
between 5 and 20 messages a day.
And all of the engineers and
part of marketing are actually
on this list and we respond to
questions or requests on the list.
And it's a great way to just
get a hold of us directly,
too, if you have any questions or
need some help with anything.
The open source projects,
including the Darwin Streaming Server,
are all available at
www.opensource.apple.com.
So you can go get the source code there,
get all the documentation for everything,
as well as sign up to
be a Darwin developer.
And for any kind of non-server
QuickTime-related things,
such as how to hint movies,
how to author movies,
QuickTime APIs for broadcasting,
things like that,
you can go to the developer site for
QuickTime at developer.apple.com.
And one thing I'd like to ask you guys
is if you guys plan to do anything around
any of the ways to extend the server,
let us know.
Let us know on the mailing list.
And we actually are really excited
to help people get things done.
We want to make sure that
you get it done right,
and we want to make sure it's
kind of painless for you,
too, because we want to see some
really cool things out there.
Today's Thursday,
so we've only got a couple of things
left in relation to QuickTime.
There's a feedback forum
at 3.30 in room J1,
and that's a feedback forum
for QuickTime in general,
so it'll be both client-side
feedback and server-side feedback.
We'll have both server
and client people there.
And there's also a beer
bus tonight at Apple,
and we will have server engineers
at the beer bus as well.
The way they've got it organized,
we're kind of broken
into different areas,
so check out either the server
group and or the QuickTime area.